# Why Forth?

Forth is very likely the simplest, fully functional computer programming language.

How simple? Well, a lot simpler than Python, that's for sure.

## From Text to Words

Both Forth and Python receive lines of text input. Both Forth and Python break the input into _tokens_. Tokens are the simplest parts of code that have some meaning. For example, the symbol `+` is a token.

The difference comes in how they do it.

### The Python Way

If you want to understand how Python does it, you'll have to read [15 pages of text](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html) (4,430 words as of 2020-06-19), as well as some cross-references. The first bit is

>2. Lexical analysis
>
> A Python program is read by a parser. Input to the parser is a stream of tokens, generated by the lexical analyzer. This chapter describes how the lexical analyzer breaks a file into tokens.
>
> Python reads program text as Unicode code points; the encoding of a source file can be given by an encoding declaration and defaults to UTF-8, see PEP 3120 for details. If the source file cannot be decoded, a SyntaxError is raised.

If you are willing to read the next several thousand words of that specification, you will begin to understand how Python forms tokens.

### The Forth Way

Here's how Forth forms tokens:

1. Tokens are separated by whitespace (including space, tab, etc.).

2. The sequence `\` (backslash) followed by any amount of whitespace considered a "graphic space" (influence: [LATEX](https://www.latex-project.org/)), _not_ whitespace.

That's it.

## From Words to Meaning

Once text is broken up into tokens, the tokens are processed in a certain order, according to a _grammar_.

### The Python Way

If you want to understand how Python does it, you'll have to read [5 pages of text](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/grammar.html) (1,349 words as of 2020-06-19). The first bit is:

    single_input: NEWLINE | simple_stmt | compound_stmt NEWLINE
    file_input: (NEWLINE | stmt)* ENDMARKER
    eval_input: testlist NEWLINE* ENDMARKER
    
    decorator: '@' dotted_name [ '(' [arglist] ')' ] NEWLINE
    decorators: decorator+
    decorated: decorators (classdef | funcdef | async_funcdef)
    
    async_funcdef: ASYNC funcdef
    funcdef: 'def' NAME parameters ['->' test] ':' [TYPE_COMMENT] func_body_suite
    
    parameters: '(' [typedargslist] ')'

That's right. The Python grammar is not written in English or in any other natural language! It's written in something like [Backus–Naur form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)

> This is madness!
> This is Python!

### The Forth Way

Here's Forth's gramar:

1. Tokens are processed in the order received.

That's it.

> This is sane.
> This is Forth.
